title: Assymetric Information Channels
date: 2012-10-15
dstr: March 1, 2012
tags: [information-theory]

Consider this scenario where you are at a concert, in the first few rows (standing only), and the person in front of you is wearing a backpack.  As they sway back an forth and periodically readjust their feet they keep smacking you in the face with their backpack.  Your first reaction is that they are just an asshole, but you're open to possible alternate explantions. After a staggering volley of backpack swipes you start to wonder whether they even realize what they're doing.  So you start to imagine swiping your backpack on the person behind you and you call to mind this experience where you have a vague sense that something is back there, but about which you know very little--maybe it's a person, maybe it's a piller, maybe it's just the crap in you bag reorganizing itself. And so, at last we have our conceptual point of departure: You've got two dynamical systems interacting with eachother behaving according to well understood physical models, but one of them "knows" more about the other.  The existence of such scenarios isn't especially surprising, but let's look a little closer.

Let's take the model a little simpler: it's not two people bouncing up against one another, but it's two sets of billiard balls which mostly bounce off one another (within their respective systems) but sometimes bounce of the other set of balls (between their systems).  How can it be that one set of balls gets more information from colliding with the other set of balls?  If the interaction is really just a set of elastic collisions, then using the momentum vectors for all of the balls in one set before and after their collisions (within and between the sets), then it should be possible to fully reconstruct the momentum vectors of their concollidants (ignoring inherent uncertainty--which should negligible for large objects like billiard balls).  This suggests that this is not the right place to find an information assymetry.  But if not here, then where?

One solution is to push back on the idea that we have perfecrt information about the momentum vectors
