title: On Reference
date: 2013-12-1
tags: [language, philosophy, reference]

Watching *Is the man who is tall happy* reminded me of my days of puzzlement
over the nature of reference.  From what I can tell this is a common stage in
the life of someone with an analytical attitude towards language.  At some point
we find ourselves asking about the mechanics of semantics and we start
to wonder about how we communally agree on "what a word means", how we
verify that someone is really correct when they make linguistic claims about
"the way things are", or perhaps we are so abruptly reminded of the "real" world
after a long adventure in formal langauges, that the very idea of real objects
strikes us as a bit unnatural.  This is probably as far as I should go without
broaching the subject of my next main bone to pick about referentialism: the
terminology of reference (which sadly, is pretty self-referential, but
let's set that aside for now). The rest of this discussion stems from not
only my puzzlment with the concept of reference, but my puzzlement about the way
that other people talk about reference.

From what I can tell, a major lineage of thinking about (and talking about)
reference comes from Gottleib Frege. Specifically, his model of meaning rests on
the distinction between the *sense* of a word and its *nominatum* (roughly just
'referent', but not identical). This dealt with a variety of puzzling questions
about what is happening when people talk "about" things which cannot always be
easily pinned down, either physically or logically.  The details of his argument
aren't relevant here (I don't think) because my main issue is with the very idea
that we should suppose a class of entities which are different from the symbols
we use to represent them. I don't think this is a particularly novel insight.
It is probably some form of scientific realism or some well-understood school of
thought in philsophy of langauge, like "anti-referentialism". But, then again,
based on my experience of philosophy of language, I'm not actually sure anyone
has given this approach much thought.  I would normally assume that I've just
misunderstood things, but after listening to Chomsky rant about how "everyone"
misunderstands reference because they don't realize that words are mental
objects, I started to wonder whether it was actually a contrarian position on
matters of reference--the sort of position which can't be easily communicated to
a member of the academy who is deeply invested in a particular way of asking
questions about language (a.k.a.  your professor).  So, this is my motivation:
to actually make this little innocent point extremely clear: there is no good
reason to believe that words correspond to real things.

Of course this is complicated by what counts as a "real thing", and
a "correspondence", but if we set terminology aside I think we can build a
positive account of what language does without ever requiring that we grant any
symbols a correspondence to epistemically real objects. (I could attempt to
paraphrase some Wittgenstein here, but I'm not sure that would make my point any
clearer.)

Let me first argue for a framework through which to approach language. Part of
my issue with the straw man referentialist is that it starts from the assumption
that language is symbolic and that symbols work essentially like a map from one
domain to another. Specifically, the straw man I'm imagining wants you to
imagine that language maps between literal linguitic representations (text,
spoken language sound representations) and something else. The range of this
mapping is often left underspecified and then becomes the object of further
inquiry.

The position I want to put forth is that by removing this deep assumption, we
do away with most of popular paradoxes about reference, in exchange for a
somewhat weirder (but more accurate, in my opinion) conception of a symbolic
system. So, what is this conception? I would prefer not to try and give a
description of this concept but rather skip to the methodology which we should
use when devising theories about language. Concretely, I think we should
approach language with a goal. In the absence of an objective, by which to
evaluate various pictures of language, we will be at the mercy of the theorist's
flare for narrative and system design aesthetics.

Instead, we should start with something like a task which sounds like it would
require understanding the thing we call language. It's not important that this
task be fully specified, but it is important to recognize that the status of a
theory requires some task against which to evaluate it. If we let a theory float
around, as it were, free of any commitments to a task, we may introduce
paradoxical structures which do not reflect real paradoxes in the task. I think
the halting problem is a good example of a paradox which lives in the very real,
and useful domain of Von Neumann archectures. The assumptions present in a
Turing machine, are not manufactured abstractions--instead, they came out of a
science / culture of building and debugging programs. Thus the set of paradoxes
related to Turing Machines are tied (in the way that I've been arguing for) to
the task of building software, which is an everyday activity for which people
actually seek out useful abstractions. The thing that philsophers of language
talk about however, I contend is not tied to such an endeavor. It bears the
hallmark signs of a conceptual framework which has read itself a bit too much.

All this is to say, let's start instead from the position that we want to
predict language, or at least predict what people who use language will do.

This is now the point of departure for developing a positive account of language
which doesn't require a two-class system of symbols and referents. Instead, we
have this pattern of language use (often with lots of context that is very much
non-liguistic) and we want to use it to make some predictions. Of course this
will involve the construction of some abstractions to make our predictive models
compact and general, but I want to focus on what I consider to be an underlying
dimension of these abstractions. On the one end, there will be abstractions
which have to do with the raw observations about language, and then there will
be abstractions which let us recognize patterns in those observations. My point
is just that referents entirely belong in the second category. There is no
reason that they need to exist beyond their use in the explaining the first
category.

This is starting to sound like the antithesis of scientific realism. My
understanding of that school of thought is that if you need an entity to explain
something--if everything act as if that entity were real--then what is the point
of witholding existence from that object. That is all we have, the argument
goes. My position is that philsophical problems with the ontological status of
referents is sufficient grounds for saying that the world does not behave just
as if these things existed. There are a good number of important pieces of
evidence with which the objective existence of referents, ever, is incompatible.
Let's give a few examples: the prevalence of subjectivity, the regularity of
ontological revision, and a good fraction of the other paradoxes of philosophy
of language. Essentially, issues with the objectivity of referents are all good
reasons for not adopting such a model.

If we're a bit more ontologically conservative (we grant existence to fewer
things), we can drop the issues with referents, but we are left with a more
impoverished model which only contains symbols. But this is as it should be. If
we are careful to frame our model in the context of a task (undertsanding
language and behavior), we should be content to take words as shorthand for
other words or other behaviors. This is what langauge is good at: the use of
some well chosen symbols lets me communicate something beyond the literal words
which I used. Instead a receiver can conjure thoughts about all kinds of other
things--and that is what the speaker is expecting! To make this more explicit,
we can give a speculative definition of language (though we shouldn't be
committed to this particular version):

One party emits symbols for all kinds of reasons (including manipulating the
listener, or due to a neural side-effect) and another party transduces these
symbols into a some mentals states, expected behaviors and potentially emits
their own symbols as a response. Someone may talk to a their friend about the
doctors who signed Obama's forged birth certificate, and their crackpot buddy
will make comment that these doctors were probably terrorists. This exchange
makes a fair amount of sense, aside from any questions about the referent of the
phrase 'forged birth certificate'. It would be useful to talk about the fact
that these two parties act as if the forged birth certificate is real, but this
is just a device for predicting how this converstaion will unfold. It need not
have any relationship to the existence of such a referent.

Hopefully this has sketched a plausible alternative to a world in which
referents are a necessary and thorny conceptual bush.

